docs/source/How_to/Simulate.md, before:

# Simulate

This project supports simulation with Verilator, Synopsys VCS, Siemens Questasim, Cadence Xcelium and AMD Xilinx simulator.
We use [FuseSoC](https://github.com/olofk/fusesoc) for all the EDA tools we use. The `fusesoc` commands are used in the targets in the Makefile.
Below the different EDA examples commands.

## Simulating with Verilator

To simulate your application with Verilator, first build the Verilator model:

```bash
make verilator-build
```

Then, you can run the application with:

```bash
make verilator-run
```

Alternatively, you can run the application manually by going to your target system build folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-verilator
```

and type to run your compiled application:

```bash
./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex
```

Finally, you can check the output by running:

```bash
cat uart0.log
```

You can directly compile the app and run all of the previous steps with:

```bash
make verilator-run-app
```

```{warning}
The `verilator-run-app` target calls the `app` target, so the application will be recompiled with default parameters unless you add specific ones like `make verilator-run-app PROJECT=hello_world`.
```

If you have gtkwave installed, you can view the waveform generated by the last Verilator simulation with:

```bash
make verilator-waves
```

## Simulating with VCS

To simulate your application with VCS, first compile the HDL:

```bash
make vcs-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-vcs
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
./openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version> +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex
```

Waveforms can be viewed with Verdi. Make sure you have the env variable `VERDI_HOME` set to your Verdi install folder, then run your compiled software as above, but with the `-gui` flag:

```bash
./openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version> +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex -gui
```

An Analog / Mixed-Signal simulation of X-HEEP, combining both the RTL system verilog files for the digital part and a SPICE file connected through a `control.init` file for the analog / mixed-signal part, can be ran by typing

```bash
make vcs-ams-build
```

then going to the target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-vcs
```

and running the same executable as for the digital simulation. Note that with Verdi you can view both the digital and the analog waveforms.

Additional instructions on how to run an analog / mixed-signal simulation of X-HEEP can be found [here](./AnalogMixedSignal.md). To try out the simulation, we provide an example SPICE netlist of an simple 1-bit ADC created by us and exported from [xschem](https://xschem.sourceforge.io/stefan/index.html) and which uses the PTM 65nm bulk CMOS model from [https://ptm.asu.edu](https://ptm.asu.edu/).

## Simulating with Questasim

To simulate your application with Questasim, first set the env variable `MODEL_TECH` to your Questasim bin folder, then compile the HDL:

```bash
make questasim-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make run PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

You can also use vopt for HDL optimized compilation:

```bash
make questasim-build-opt
```

then go to

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and

```bash
make run RUN_OPT=1 PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

You can also compile with the UPF power domain description as:

```bash
make questasim-build-opt-upf FUSESOC_PARAM="--USE_UPF"
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and then execute software as:

```bash
make run RUN_OPT=1 RUN_UPF=1 PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

Questasim version must be >= Questasim 2020.4

## Simulating with Xcelium

To simulate your application with Xcelium, first compile the HDL:

```bash
make xcelium-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-xcelium/
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make run PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

## Simulating with Xilinx simulator

To simulate your application with Xilinx simulator, first set up the Vivado environment by running `source <vivado-installation-path>/settings64.sh`, then compile the HDL:

```bash
make xsim-build SIM_ARGS="--testplusarg firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make xsim-run
```

To show the waveforms of your application type:

```bash
make xsim-waves
```

This will open a Vivado instance in a `wiev only mode` in which is possible to wiev the waveforms of your last simulation.

## Simulation parameters

You may pass additional simulation parameters to the generated simulation executable, in the form of *plusargs*: `+<parameter>=<value>`.

- `+firmware=<path>`:
  Loads the hex file specified in `<path>` into memory.
  This allows you to run a compiled executable directly, as if it were already written in memory since the beginning of the simulation.
  For example, `./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex` will launch the Verilator simulation and instruct it to load the compiled application executable into memory and run it.

  When launching the simulation through the dedicated `make` target, like `make verilator-run`, the `+firmware` parameter is automatically propagated to the simulation executable.

- `+boot_sel=<val>`:
  Runs the simulation booting from testbench/jtag (`val=0`) or loading the firmware from the external flash (`val=1`).
  When `0` (by default), you can run a compiled executable directly, as if it were already written in memory since the beginning of the simulation. While if it is `1`, the code is loaded from the external flash via SPI.
  For example, `./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex +boot_sel=1` will launch the Verilator simulation and instruct the bootrom to copy the firmware from the external flash to the main memory, then, the CPU will jump to SRAM and execute the code.

  When launching the simulation through the dedicated `make` target, like `make verilator-run`, the `+boot_sel` parameter can be be passed to the simulation executable via the `SIM_ARGS` command-line argument, e.g. `make verilator-run SIM_ARGS="+boot_sel=1"`.
  
- `+max_sim_time=<time>`:
  Runs the simulation for a maximum of `<time>` clock cycles.
  This is useful in case your application gets stuck in a certain point and never finishes; this parameter will force the simulation to terminate after a certain time so that you can later analyze the generated `waveform.fst` (or `waveform.vcd` if using QuestaSim) file.
  In that case, the simulation executable will exit with a return code of 2, indicating premature termination.
  If this parameter is not provided, the simulation will run until the program finishes (the `main()` function ends).

  Alternatively, you may add a time suffix (`s`, `ms`, `us`, `ns`, `ps`) to run the simulation until the specified simulation time has been reached (1 clock cycle = 10ns).
  This is, `+max_sim_time=750us` is the same as `+max_sim_time=75000`.
  (Note that there's no space between the number and the unit, and that fractional values are not supported.)

  If you're launching the Verilator simulation via `make`, you may pass this parameter via the `MAX_SIM_TIME=` command-line argument, e.g. `make verilator-run MAX_SIM_TIME=750us`.


### Xilinx simulator

When using the Xilinx simulator, plusargs (e.g. `firmware`, `verbose`, etc.) must be passed through `xsim_options`.
With the Xilinx simulator, they are incorporated into the generated run script during the build phase.

Plusarguments should be provided when invoking `make xsim-build`.

Furthermore, Xilinx simulator requires plusargs to be specified using `--testplusarg`, and the argument itself (e.g. `--plusarg firmware=...`, `--plusarg verbose`), rather than using `+`.

```bash
make xsim-build SIM_ARGS='--testplusarg firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex --testplusarg verbose'

```

## Simulating the UART DPI

To simulate the UART, we use the LowRISC OpenTitan [UART DPI](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/tree/master/hw/dv/dpi/uartdpi).
Read how to interact with it in the Section "Running Software on a Verilator Simulation with Bazel" [here](https://opentitan.org/guides/getting_started/setup_verilator.html#running-software-on-a-verilator-simulation-with-bazel).
The output of the UART DPI module is printed in the `uart0.log` file in the simulation folder. The content of this file is automatically printed on the console once the simulation successfully completes.

Commit message:

Inserted +verbose in sim doc

docs/source/How_to/Simulate.md, after:

# Simulate

This project supports simulation with Verilator, Synopsys VCS, Siemens Questasim, Cadence Xcelium and AMD Xilinx simulator.
We use [FuseSoC](https://github.com/olofk/fusesoc) for all the EDA tools we use. The `fusesoc` commands are used in the targets in the Makefile.
Below the different EDA examples commands.

## Simulating with Verilator

To simulate your application with Verilator, first build the Verilator model:

```bash
make verilator-build
```

Then, you can run the application with:

```bash
make verilator-run
```

Alternatively, you can run the application manually by going to your target system build folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-verilator
```

and type to run your compiled application:

```bash
./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex
```

Finally, you can check the output by running:

```bash
cat uart0.log
```

You can directly compile the app and run all of the previous steps with:

```bash
make verilator-run-app
```

```{warning}
The `verilator-run-app` target calls the `app` target, so the application will be recompiled with default parameters unless you add specific ones like `make verilator-run-app PROJECT=hello_world`.
```

If you have gtkwave installed, you can view the waveform generated by the last Verilator simulation with:

```bash
make verilator-waves
```

## Simulating with VCS

To simulate your application with VCS, first compile the HDL:

```bash
make vcs-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-vcs
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
./openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version> +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex
```

Waveforms can be viewed with Verdi. Make sure you have the env variable `VERDI_HOME` set to your Verdi install folder, then run your compiled software as above, but with the `-gui` flag:

```bash
./openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version> +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex -gui
```

An Analog / Mixed-Signal simulation of X-HEEP, combining both the RTL system verilog files for the digital part and a SPICE file connected through a `control.init` file for the analog / mixed-signal part, can be ran by typing

```bash
make vcs-ams-build
```

then going to the target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-vcs
```

and running the same executable as for the digital simulation. Note that with Verdi you can view both the digital and the analog waveforms.

Additional instructions on how to run an analog / mixed-signal simulation of X-HEEP can be found [here](./AnalogMixedSignal.md). To try out the simulation, we provide an example SPICE netlist of an simple 1-bit ADC created by us and exported from [xschem](https://xschem.sourceforge.io/stefan/index.html) and which uses the PTM 65nm bulk CMOS model from [https://ptm.asu.edu](https://ptm.asu.edu/).

## Simulating with Questasim

To simulate your application with Questasim, first set the env variable `MODEL_TECH` to your Questasim bin folder, then compile the HDL:

```bash
make questasim-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make run PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

You can also use vopt for HDL optimized compilation:

```bash
make questasim-build-opt
```

then go to

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and

```bash
make run RUN_OPT=1 PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

You can also compile with the UPF power domain description as:

```bash
make questasim-build-opt-upf FUSESOC_PARAM="--USE_UPF"
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-modelsim/
```

and then execute software as:

```bash
make run RUN_OPT=1 RUN_UPF=1 PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

Questasim version must be >= Questasim 2020.4

## Simulating with Xcelium

To simulate your application with Xcelium, first compile the HDL:

```bash
make xcelium-build
```

then, go to your target system built folder

```bash
cd ./build/openhwgroup.org_systems_core-v-mini-mcu_<version>/sim-xcelium/
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make run PLUSARGS="c firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

## Simulating with Xilinx simulator

To simulate your application with Xilinx simulator, first set up the Vivado environment by running `source <vivado-installation-path>/settings64.sh`, then compile the HDL:

```bash
make xsim-build SIM_ARGS="--testplusarg firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex"
```

and type to run your compiled software:

```bash
make xsim-run
```

To show the waveforms of your application type:

```bash
make xsim-waves
```

This will open a Vivado instance in a `wiev only mode` in which is possible to wiev the waveforms of your last simulation.

## Simulation parameters

You may pass additional simulation parameters to the generated simulation executable, in the form of *plusargs*: `+<parameter>=<value>`.

- `+firmware=<path>`:
  Loads the hex file specified in `<path>` into memory.
  This allows you to run a compiled executable directly, as if it were already written in memory since the beginning of the simulation.
  For example, `./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex` will launch the Verilator simulation and instruct it to load the compiled application executable into memory and run it.

  When launching the simulation through the dedicated `make` target, like `make verilator-run`, the `+firmware` parameter is automatically propagated to the simulation executable.

- `+boot_sel=<val>`:
  Runs the simulation booting from testbench/jtag (`val=0`) or loading the firmware from the external flash (`val=1`).
  When `0` (by default), you can run a compiled executable directly, as if it were already written in memory since the beginning of the simulation. While if it is `1`, the code is loaded from the external flash via SPI.
  For example, `./Vtestharness +firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex +boot_sel=1` will launch the Verilator simulation and instruct the bootrom to copy the firmware from the external flash to the main memory, then, the CPU will jump to SRAM and execute the code.

  When launching the simulation through the dedicated `make` target, like `make verilator-run`, the `+boot_sel` parameter can be be passed to the simulation executable via the `SIM_ARGS` command-line argument, e.g. `make verilator-run SIM_ARGS="+boot_sel=1"`.
  
- `+max_sim_time=<time>`:
  Runs the simulation for a maximum of `<time>` clock cycles.
  This is useful in case your application gets stuck in a certain point and never finishes; this parameter will force the simulation to terminate after a certain time so that you can later analyze the generated `waveform.fst` (or `waveform.vcd` if using QuestaSim) file.
  In that case, the simulation executable will exit with a return code of 2, indicating premature termination.
  If this parameter is not provided, the simulation will run until the program finishes (the `main()` function ends).

  Alternatively, you may add a time suffix (`s`, `ms`, `us`, `ns`, `ps`) to run the simulation until the specified simulation time has been reached (1 clock cycle = 10ns).
  This is, `+max_sim_time=750us` is the same as `+max_sim_time=75000`.
  (Note that there's no space between the number and the unit, and that fractional values are not supported.)

  If you're launching the Verilator simulation via `make`, you may pass this parameter via the `MAX_SIM_TIME=` command-line argument, e.g. `make verilator-run MAX_SIM_TIME=750us`.

- `+verbose`:
  Increases the simulation debug verbosity, printing additional runtime information to help with troubleshooting.

### Xilinx simulator

When using the Xilinx simulator, plusargs (e.g. `firmware`, `verbose`, etc.) must be passed through `xsim_options`.
With the Xilinx simulator, they are incorporated into the generated run script during the build phase.

Plusarguments should be provided when invoking `make xsim-build`.

Furthermore, Xilinx simulator requires plusargs to be specified using `--testplusarg`, and the argument itself (e.g. `--plusarg firmware=...`, `--plusarg verbose`), rather than using `+`.

```bash
make xsim-build SIM_ARGS='--testplusarg firmware=../../../sw/build/main.hex --testplusarg verbose'

```

## Simulating the UART DPI

To simulate the UART, we use the LowRISC OpenTitan [UART DPI](https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan/tree/master/hw/dv/dpi/uartdpi).
Read how to interact with it in the Section "Running Software on a Verilator Simulation with Bazel" [here](https://opentitan.org/guides/getting_started/setup_verilator.html#running-software-on-a-verilator-simulation-with-bazel).
The output of the UART DPI module is printed in the `uart0.log` file in the simulation folder. The content of this file is automatically printed on the console once the simulation successfully completes.
